Report on the SIAG/LA  
International Summer School on Numerical Linear Algebra

This is a report on the SIAG/LA-SIMUMAT International 
Summer School on Numerical Linear Algebra (ISSNLA) which
took place at the Centro Internacional de Encuentros Matematicos
(CIEM) in Castro Urdiales (Spain), July 21-25, 2008.

This first ISSNLA was jointly organized by SIAG/LA and SIMUMAT. SIMUMAT
(Mathematical Modeling and Simulation in Science and Technology) is a
Spanish Research Project funded by the Government of the State of Madrid
that involves four Universities and Research Centers from Madrid. 

The local organizing committee consisted of 
* Blanca Ayuso, (SIMUMAT-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid)
* Miguel Angel Benítez, (Administrator Manager of SIMUMAT)
* Froilán M. Dopico, (SIMUMAT-Universidad Carlos III de Madrid)
* Alberto Ibort, (SIMUMAT-Universidad Carlos III de Madrid)
* Juan Manuel Molera, (Universidad Carlos III de Madrid)
* Julio Moro, (Universidad Carlos III de Madrid)

Three members of this committee (Ayuso, Dopico, and Molera)
attended the ISSNLA, and took care of the local details.

Four courses were given,
*  Krylov subspace methods for solving linear systems 
Michael Eiermann (Technische Universität Bergakademie Freiberg)
*  Matrix methods in data mining 
Lars Eldén (Linköping University
*  Mechanics and linear algebra 
Richard B. Lehoucq (Sandia National Laboratories)
*  Structured eigenvalue problems: modern theory and computational practice 
David S. Watkins (Washington State University)

Fifty graduate students from 18 countries attended the school.
The country distribution is as follows:
Belgium 2, Brazil 1, Canada 5, Czech Republic 4, Croatia 3, 
Germany 9, Ireland 1, Italy 2, Japan 1, Lithuania 1, Norway 1,
Russia 1, Slovenia 1, Spain 10, Turkey 1, UK 1, USA 5, Venezuela 1.

We should mention that in fact, there were 75 applications.
The local organizers together with the steering committee
organized the admissions process. The decision was to admit
only graduate students, and not people who had already a degree.
With very few exceptions, all admitted students attended.

Most students shared hotel rooms. Lunches were covered by
the School, and everyone had their long lunch together.

By all accounts the school was a great success. The lecturers
and students reported a high level of satisfaction with the
school.  In particular, students were very enthusiastic both 
in terms of the lecturers, the courses, the location, and 
on the camaraderie among the diverse students attending.

We will soon start to plan the 2010 summer school.
