GROWING INTEREST IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL DRAWS 70 TO RALEIGH WORKSHOP 

by Michael W. Berry


An edited version of this article appeared in SIAM News, vol. 34,
no. 1, p. 20 (2001).

The first "Computational Information Retrieval Workshop" (CIR00) was
be held on Sunday, October 22, 2000 in Raleigh, NC.  The workshop took
place at the Jane S. McKimmon Center on the campus of North Carolina
State University, immediately preceding the Seventh SIAM Conference on
Applied Linear Algebra.  The workshop attendees numbered close to 70
and represented numerous universities, industrial corporations, and
government laboratories.  Invited and contributed talks focused on the
role of linear algebra, computational statistics, and computer science
in the development of algorithms and software systems for information
(particularly text) retrieval. The workshop was graciously funded by
SIAM, National Science Foundation, Boeing, M-CAM, Inc., and Telcordia
Technologies, Inc.

The invited talks were organized into 3 sessions and the speakers
are listed below:

Session 1
Haesun Park, University of Minnesota (Dimension Reduction in Vector Space
Based Information Retrieval Using Least Norm)
Axel Ruhe, Chalmers University (Information Retrieval Using Short Krylov
Subspaces)
Jason Wu, Boeing (Information Retrieval and Classification with Subspace
Representations)

Session 2
Kyle Gallivan, Florida State University (Applications of Incremental Dominant
Singular Subspaces)
Inderjit Dhillon, University of Texas at Austin (Concept Decompositions for
Large-Scale Information Retrieval)
Elizabeth Jessup, University of Colorado (Applications of Orthogonal
Decomposition in Information Retrieval)

Session 3
William Pottenger, Lehigh University (Detecting Emerging Conceptual Contexts in
Data Mining)
Padma Raghavan, Pennsylvania State University (Symbolic Preprocessing
Techniques
for Information Retrieval Using Vector Space Models)
Chris Ding, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (A Probabilistic Model for
LSI/SVD in Information Retrieval)

For an industry perspective on research and development in concept
modeling, Brian Baker from Oingo, Inc. based in Los Angeles, CA (see
http://www.oingo.com) gave a luncheon presentation entitled
"Meaning-Based Applications: Harnessing Semantic Computation and an
Ontology for a More Intelligent Search".

The five contributed talks comprising the final afternoon session were given by

Jacob Kogan, University of Maryland, Baltimore County (Clustering Large
Unstructured Document Sets)
Reginald Walker, University of California, Los Angeles (Dynamic Load Balancing
Model: Design and Validation of a Biological Model for a Parallel
Pseudo-Search)
Parry Husbands, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (On the Use of the
Singular Value Decomposition for Text Retrieval)
Flavio Sartoretto, University of Venezia (A Comparative Analysis of LSI
Strategies)
John Caron, UCAR/Unidata (Applying LSA to Online Customer Support: A Trial
Study)

Abstracts for all the talks presented at CIR'00 are available online
at http://www.cs.utk.edu/cir00, and SIAM will publish a proceedings of
the workshop in early 2001. Many of the talks focused on the use of
Latent Semantic Indexing/Analysis (LSI/A) and alternative vector space
models for Information Retrieval (IR). Approaches based on less
computationally demanding techniques such as {\em concept
decompositions} were shown to quite effective for document clustering
(I. Dhillon).  Some progress has been made in reducing the SVD-based
costs of LSI using symbolic techniques common to sparse matrix
factorization research and graph theory (P. Ragahavan).  A different
approach to SVD-complexity reduction, based on fast bi-diagonalization
(short Krylov subspaces) was also presented (A. Ruhe).

Demonstrating optimal performance of LSI/A across different text
collections remains inconsistent (E. Jessup) and workshop discussions
on a paradigm shift from "noise reduction" associated with low-rank
subspace modeling to "noise addition" with more emphasis on the
statistical significance of additive subspace dimensionality emerged
(C. Ding, K. Gallivan). Complete IR systems based on LSI/A have been
designed at Minnesota (BIRDS project, H. Park) and Boeing (TRUST,
J. Wu), and new application areas such as the automatic detection of
warranty repair claims (W. Pottenger) have emerged.  The workshop was
quite successful in outlining future research in vector space IR
modeling and there is considerable interest in holding a follow-up
workshop next year (CIR'01).

