SIAG/LA AND ILAS MARK TWENTY YEARS OF PROGRESS 
AT JOINT APPLIED LINEAR ALGEBRA MEETING

by Ilse C.F. Ipsen and Volker Mehrmann


An edited version of this article appeared in SIAM News, vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 19, 20 (2001).

The Seventh SIAM Conference on Applied Linear Algebra took place at
North Carolina State University in Raleigh on 23-25 October 2000.  It
was a special occasion. The first SIAM meeting on Applied Linear
Algebra was held in Raleigh nearly 20 years ago.  To commemorate this
milestone, the International Linear Algebra Society (ILAS) agreed to
hold its annual meeting jointly with SIAM.  The conference was a grand
combined meeting in celebration of the accomplishments in linear
algebra and its applications.  The talks represented a wide and
inclusive range of topics in applied and core linear algebra, as well
as industrial applications.  The number of registered participants
exceeded 250, plus about 50 "walk-ins". The conference was preceded by
the first workshop on Computational Information Retrieval, CIR00, on
22 October which was organized by Michael Berry of the University of
Tennessee (see the corresponding article by Michael Berry in SIAM News).


The Applied Linear Algebra Conference was jointly sponsored by the
SIAM Activity on Linear Algebra (SIAG/LA) and ILAS, and organized by
Carl Meyer and Ilse Ipsen from NC State University. The venue was
McKimmon Conference Center on the NC State Campus. The conference
participants were kept busy with talks that started at 8:30 in the
morning and ended as late as 10 o'clock at night.  The program was
composed of 8 hour-long plenary talks, and otherwise three parallel
sessions with invited talks and minisymposia, and contributed talks as
well as poster presentations.


On Wednesday afternoon, the last day of the conference, Jim Demmel,
the chairman of the SIAG/LA, presented the prize for the best paper in
linear algebra. The prize, consisting of a calligraphed certificate
and a plaque, was awarded to two parties: to Olga Holtz from the
University of Wisconsin in Madison, and to the team of Alan Edelman
from MIT and Erik Elmroth and Bo K{\aa}gstr{\"o}m from the University
of Ume{\aa} in Sweden.
 
In her prize winning paper, "Not All GKK Tau-Matrices are Stable"
(Linear Algebra Appl. vol. 291, no. 1-3, pp 235-244, 1999), Olga Holtz
solves a long standing open problem concerning the location of spectra
for two important classes of matrices that arise frequently in
applications.  The history of this problem started in 1958, when Olga
Taussky proposed to unify the theory (regarding stability, eigenvalue
bounds, convergence of iterative methods, etc) for the three classes
of positive semidefinite, element-wise nonnegative and totally
nonnegative matrices. In 1976, Engel & Schneider introduced two
classes of matrices, named Omega and Tau matrices after Olga Taussky,
that combine the three classes above. Omega and Tau matrices are
characterized by eigenvalue inequalities for principal submatrices or
alternatively by Hadamard Fischer type determinantal inequalities.
Yet another matrix class, the GKK matrices named after Gantmacher,
Krein and Kotelyanskii, was introduced in the 1967 by Carlson. This
class is defined by different determinantal inequalities and does not
contain totally nonnegative matrices.
 
Engel & Schneider conjectured positive stability for the class of Tau
matrices and Carlson for the GKK matrices.  Using an analogy to
incidence matrices of graphs, Varga showed in 1978 that the
eigenvalues of Tau matrices of order 3 are located in a cone in the
right half-plane whose opening angle is $\pi/6$. He conjectured that,
in general, the eigenvalues of a Tau matrix of order $n$ are located
in a cone in the right half-plane with opening angle $\pi (n-2)/2n$.

Hershkowitz and Mehrmann extended Varga's results to matrices of order
4.  In the early 1980's Mehrmann, without any success, performed an
extensive numerical search for matrices of orders up to 9, in order to
find a counterexample to Varga's conjecture.  Subsequently, no
progress was made concerning a positive or negative solution of the
problem until Olga Holtz constructed an upper Hessenberg Toeplitz
matrix of order 44 with a large band of zeroes above the diagonal that
represents a counterexample to the conjectures by Carlson, Engel &
Schneider and Varga.
 
 
In their prize winning paper "A Geometric Approach to Perturbation
Theory of Matrices and Matrix Pencils. Part I: Versal Deformations"
(SIAM. J. Matrix Anal.  Appl., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 653-692, 1997),
Alan Edelman, Erik Elmroth and Bo K{\aa}gstr{\"o}m introduce the
geometric theory of versal deformations to derive metrical information
for the perturbation theory of the Kronecker canonical form of a
matrix pencil.  The importance of efficient and reliable numerical
software for the computation of the Jordan structure of a matrix or
the Kronecker structure of a matrix pencil is evident in numerous
applications in numerical linear algebra, control, and ordinary
differential equations. The geometric theory developed by Edelman,
Elmroth and K{\aa}gstr{\"o}m provides the insight necessary to get a
grasp on the perturbation directions. This in turn leads to a
numerical tool that, even in finite precision arithmetic, gives a very
good picture of the Jordan and Kronecker structures.
 
 
Olga Holtz gave a 1/2 hour presentation about her work, while Alan
Edelman, Erik Elmroth and Bo K{\aa}gstr{\"o}m gave a truly joint talk,
with each author taking 10 minutes to present a particular aspect of
the paper.  The members of prize committee were Volker Mehrmann
(chair), Uwe Helmke, Danny Hershkowitz, Nick Higham and Zdenek Strakos.
 

The eight plenary speakers and their titles were:
Gene Golub (Solution of Indefinite Systems and Inner/Outer Iterations),
Thomas Kailath (Displacement Structure: From Theory to Applications),
Gilbert Strang (Random Perturbations of Familiar Matrices),
Charles Van Loan (The Ubiquitous Kronecker Product),
Richard Varga (Gerschgorin Circles, Cassini Ovals, and the Brualdi Set for
               Eigenvalue Inclusion Regions in the Complex Plane),
Margaret Wright (Structure, Sensitivity, and Semi-Solutions: Linear Algebra 
                 in Interior-Point Methods for Optimization),
plus the two ILAS Speakers:
Hans Schneider (Geometric Perron-Frobenius Theory),
Hugo Woerdemann (Moment Problems).

The nine invited concurrent speakers and their titles were:
Tony Chan (Linear and Nonlinear Algebra Problems Arising in PDE Imaging),
Jack Dongarra (The Impact of Computer Architectures On Linear Algebra
               Algorithms),
Roger Horn (Conditionally Positive Definite Matrices),
John Lewis (Cruising (Approximately) at 41,000 Feet -- Iterative Methods
            at Boeing),
Volker Mehrmann (Numerical Solution of Large Sparse Quadratic Eigenvalue
                 Problems),
Dianne O'Leary (The Linear Algebra of Image Processing),
Lothar Reichel (Error Estimation in Iterative Methods),
Siegfried Rump (Componentwise and Structured Perturbations),
Paul Van Dooren (Convex Optimization over Positive Polynomials and Polynomial
                 Matrices).


The minisymposium organizers and their minisymposium titles were:
Michele Benzi (Recent Developments in Approximate Inverse Preconditioning),
Charles Johnson (Totally Nonnegative Matrices I and II),
Athanasios  Antoulas (Approximation of Large-scale Dynamical Systems),
Michael Berry (Algorithms for Information Retrieval and Management),
Henk Van der Vorst (Invariant Subspaces),
James Nagy (Matrix Computations in Image Processing),
James Demmel (Direct Methods for Solving Linear Systems),
plus a panel discussion (Linear Algebra, What's it Worth?) organized by 
Daniel Pierce.


Although the conference featured almost non-stop talks, there was
still time to socialize at the breakfasts and lunches provided by SIAM
in McKimmon Center and at night on Hillsborough Street, the main
thoroughfare of the NC State Campus. At the business meeting of the
SIAG/LA on Monday night everyone agreed that the cooperation with ILAS
was successful and should be continued in future SIAM Linear Algebra
meetings as well as ILAS meetings.  The eighth SIAM Conference on
Applied Linear Algebra will be organized by Roy Mathias and Hugo
Woerdemann from the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg in 2003.

Nick Higham has published photos of the conference on his webpage, at
http://www.ma.man.ac.uk/~higham/photos/la00/




Photos

-- The winners of the best paper prize:
   Erik Elmroth, Bo Kagstrom, Olga Holtz, Alan Edelman
   http://www.ma.man.ac.uk/~higham/photos/la00/images/001025-2003-35.jpg

-- Dianne O'Leary and Margaret Wright:
   http://www4.ncsu.edu/~ipsen/la2000/OlearyWright.jpg

-- Ilse Ipsen and Paul Van Dooren:
   http://www4.ncsu.edu/~ipsen/la2000/IpsenVanDooren.jpg

-- Jack Dongarra and Cleve Moler:
   http://www4.ncsu.edu/~ipsen/la2000/DongarraMoler.jpg

-- Siegfried Rump, Carl Meyer and Gil Strang
   http://www4.ncsu.edu/~ipsen/la2000/RumpMeyerStrang.jpg

-- SIAM Program Director Darrell Ross and Richard Varga
   http://www4.ncsu.edu/~ipsen/la2000/RossVarga.jpg



